So, probability calculus is useful for
understanding the rules that probability
must follow and forms the foundation for
all thinking on probability.
However, we need something that's a bit
easier to work with for numeric outcomes
of experiments, where here I'm using
the word experiment in a broad sense.
So densities and mass functions for random
variables are the best starting point for
this, and this is all we will need.
Probably the most famous example of
a density is the so called bell curve.
So in this class you'll actually
learn what it means to say that
the data follow a bell curve.
You'll actually learn what
the bell curve represents.
Among other things, you'll know that when
you talk about probabilities associated
with the bell curve or
the normal distribution, you're
talking about population quantities.
You're not talking about statement
about what occurs in the data.
How this is going to work and
where we're going with this is that we're
going to collect data that's going to be
used to estimate properties
of the population, okay.
And that's where we'd like to head.
But first before we start working with the
data, we need to develop our intuition for
how the population quantities work.
A random variable is the numeric
outcome of an experiment.
So the random variables that we will study
come in two kinds, discrete or continuous.
Discrete are ones that you can count,
like number of web hits, or the number,
the different outcomes
that a die can take.
Or even things that aren't even numeric,
like hair color.
And we can assign the numeric value,
one for blonde, two for brown, three for
black, and so on.
Continuous random variables can
take any value in a continuum.
The way we work with discrete
random variables is,
we're going to assign a probability
to every value that they can take.
The way that we're going to work with
continuous random variables is we're
going to assign probabilities
to ranges that they can take.
Let's just go over some simple examples
of things that can be thought of
as random variables.
So the biggest ones for building up
our intuition in this class will be
the flip of a coin, and we'll either
say heads or tails, or 0 or 1.
This is discrete random variable,
because it could only take two levels.
The outcome of the roll of a die is
another discrete random variable,
because it could only take
one of six possible values.
These are kind of silly random
variables because they're,
the probability mechanics is so
conceptually simple.
Some more complex random
variables are given below.
For example, the amount of web,
the website traffic on a given day,
the number of web hits,
would be a count random variable.
We'll likely treat that as discrete.
However we don't really
have an upper bound on it.
So it's an interesting kind
of discrete random variable.
We'll use the Poisson distribution
likely to model that.
The BMI of a subject four years
after a baseline measurement is,
a somewhat random example I came up with.
And in this case we would likely
model BMI body mass index as
a continuous random variable.
The hypertension status of a subject
randomly drawn from a population could be
another random variable.
Here we might give a person a one
if they have hypertension or
were diagnosed with hypertension,
and a zero otherwise.
So, this random variable would
likely be modeled as discrete, or
would be modeled as discrete.
The number of people who click on an ad.
Again, this is another discrete random
variable, but a, but an unbounded one.
But still, we would still assign
a problem, probability, for zero clicks,
one clicks, two clicks,
three clicks and so on.
So intelligence quotients
are often modeled as continuous.
When we talked about
discrete random variables,
we said that the way we're
going to work with probability for
them is to assign a probability to
every value that they can take.
So why don't we just call that a function?
We'll call it the probability
mass function.
And this is simply the function that takes
any value that a discrete random variable
can take, and assigns the probability
that it takes that specific value.
So a PMF for a die roll would
assign one sixth for the value one,
one-sixth for the value two,
one-sixth for the value three, and so on.
But you can come up with rules that a PMF
must satisfy in order to then satisfy
the basic rules of probability that we
outlined at the beginning of the class.
First, it must always be larger than
zero because we, larger than or
equal to zero, because we've already
seen that a probability has to
be a number between zero and
one, inclusive.
But then also the sum of the possible
values that the random variable can
take has to add up to one, just like
if I add up the probability a die takes
the value one, plus the probability
that it takes the value two,
plus the probability it takes the value
three, plus the value it takes four, five,
six, that has to add up to one, otherwise.
The probability of something happening,
right,
that the die takes one of the possible
values, would not add up to one,
which would violate one of our
basic tenets of probability.
So all a PMF does, has to satisfy,
is these two rules.
We won't worry too much about these rules.
Instead, we will work with
probability mass functions that
are particularly useful, like
the binomial one, the canonical one for
flipping a coin, and the Poisson one,
the canonical one for modelling counts.
Let's go over perhaps the most famous
example of a probability mass function,
the result of a coin flip,
the so-called Bernoulli distribution.
So let's let capital X be
the result a coin flip,
where X equals 0 represents talks and
X equal 1 represents heads.
Here we're using the notation where an
upper case letter represents a potentially
unrealized value of the random variable.
So it makes sense to talk about
the probability that x equals 0 and
the probability that capital X equals 1.
Where as a lower case x is just
a placeholder that we're going to
plug a specific number into.
So in the PMF down here,
we have p x equals one half to the x,
one half to the one minus x.
So if we plug in x equal
to 0 we get one half, and
if we plug in x equal
to 1 we get one half.
And this merely says is that
the probability that the random
variable takes the value 0 is one half and
the probability that the random variable
takes the value 1 is also one-half.
This is for a fair coin.
But what if we add an unfair coin?
Let's let theta be the probability
of a head and 1 minus theta be
the probability of a tail,
where theta's some number between 0 and 1.
Then we could write our probability
math function like this.
P of x is theta to the x,
1 minus theta to the 1 minus x.
Now, notice if I plug in a lower case x
of 1 we get theta, and if I plog in a,
plug in a lower case x of
0 I get 1 minus theta.
Thus for this population distribution
the probability a random variable takes
the random 0 is 1 minus theta.
And the probability that it
takes the value of 1 is theta.
This is incredibly useful, for example,
for modeling the prevalence of something.
For example, if we wanted to model
the prevalence of hypertension,
we might assume that the population or
the sample that we're getting
is not unlike flips of biased coin
with the success probability theta.
And just to connect it to what
we'll be doing in the future.
The issue is that we don't know theta.
So, we're going to use our data to
estimate this population proportion.